## 4.1 Federation without TLS (no Peer-Verification)

This first post describes how federation (https://www.rabbitmq.com/federated-exchanges.html) is setup without security. Security will be added in subsequent posts.

*Contents*:
- [4.1.1 Enable Federation-Plugin for RabbitMQ (Upstream & Downstream)](#311-create-client-key-and-certificate-signing-request)
- [4.1.2 Configure Downstream](#412-configure-downstream)
- [4.1.3 Create Federated Exchange](#413-create-federated-exchange)
- [4.1.4 Test it](#414-test-it)

---


**Setup/Environment**
- Use 2 VMs.
- **VM-Upstream**: IP-address: 192.168.56.102
- **VM-Downstream**: IP-address: 192.168.56.103

**Remember**: => *Upstream* is closer to where messages are published. (Same as with rivers, where upstream is where the water is coming from...)

---
#### 4.1.1 Enable Federation-Plugin for RabbitMQ (Upstream & Downstream)

Create a docker-container with federation plugin enabled. This is used for both upstream and downstream RabbitMQ instances.

- Create *Dockerfile* (without any key-material for now):
  ````
  FROM rabbitmq:3-management
  
  RUN rabbitmq-plugins enable rabbitmq_federation && \ 
      rabbitmq-plugins enable rabbitmq_federation_management
  ````

- Build the container
  ````
  docker build -t rabbitmq-with-federation .  
  ````
  - for this series of post, the images are called `rabbitmq-with-federation`

- Run the container **in upstream-VM and in downstream-VM** 
  ````
  docker container run -d --hostname rabbit-host --name my-rabbit -p 8080:15672 -p 5672:5672 rabbitmq-with-federation
  ````
  - `hostname` and container-`name` can be the same. 
    This info never leaves the VM.


---

#### 4.1.2 Configure Downstream

Do the following steps in the Downstream-VM:

- **Specify how to connect to the Upstream-broker** 
  (by setting *federation-upstream* parameter/component-name).
  ````
  docker container exec my-rabbit rabbitmqctl set_parameter federation-upstream my-federation '{"uri":"amqp://guest:guest@192.168.56.102","expires":3600000}' 
  ````
  - The actual name (`my-federation`) is not relevant for the example. It could be used below when setting the *policy*, but I'm going to use *all*.
  - See https://www.rabbitmq.com/uri-query-parameters.html for Info how to form the URI which is passed as argument when the *federation-upstream* parameter is set.
  - See https://www.rabbitmq.com/parameters.html#intro on how to set parameters.
  - See https://www.rabbitmq.com/federation-reference.html for info on the contents of the json-object.
   

- **Create a policy that declares which exchanges shall be federated**
  ````
  docker container exec my-rabbit rabbitmqctl set_policy my-federation-policy --apply-to exchanges "^federated\." '{"federation-upstream-set":"all"}'   
  ````
  - Policy details of above command:
    - Policy-name: `my-federation-policy` (not relevant for the example)
    - Policy-priority: Not specified. This is an optional param.
    - Policy-definition: `{"federation-upstream-set":"all"}` - a set of key value pairs that will be injected as optional arguments in the matching (existing/future) exchange.
    - `--apply-to`: Will always be `exchanges` for exchange-federation.
    - Policy-pattern: `"^federation\."` - reg-ex pattern defining to which exchanges this policy will apply
  - See https://www.rabbitmq.com/parameters.html#policies on the use and configuration of policies.



This policy basically states: 
> For all existing and future `exchanges` with a name matching the pattern `"^federated\."`, create a correspondig upstream-exchange on `all` defined upstream-connections.

Since there is no exchange yet with a matching name, nothing has happened yet.
We are going to create one in the next step.
There is no info yet added to the upstream-broker.
The only thing visible in the downstream-brokers are the policy and upstream-declaration (see the 'admin' tab in the management-UI).

---

#### 4.1.3 Create Federated Exchange

I'm using the management-UI to do the changes describes in this step.
This UI is accessible in each VM under `http://localhost:8080/#/`.

The following steps have to be carried out on the **downstream** system.

- **Create an exchange**: Create an exchange with name `federated.demo-exchange`. (The name must so that it is matched against the reg-ex defined in the policy). 
  - ***Now the magic happens!***. When the exchange is created, RabbitMQ tries to match it against all policies. The name of this exchange matches above policy. 
    This can be seen in the exchange-overview.
  - Also check the 'federation-status' in the 'admin' tab.
    It shows if connection to the upstream-broker succeeded. 
    This will be the relevant page in the upcoming exercise when configuring client/server certificates.
  - As result of the policy, RabbitMQ will handle this exchange as federated exchange - and it creates an upstream-exchange on the upstream-broker immediately. 
    See the upstream-broker management-UI.
- **Create a queue**: Create a queue with name `demo-queue`.
- **Bind the queue to the exchange**.

---

#### 4.1.4 Test it

Using the management-UI on the *upstream broker*, select the (no existing) `federated-demo-exchange` and publish a message. 
The message should be received on the *downstream broker* in the `demo-queue`.





